docs: ur hardware interface intro and control modes (#329)
aica-technology/api: docs/docs/examples/guides/ur-harware-interface.md

- use of the UR impedance controller and hand guiding controller to leverage UR Force mode from AICA Studio
- use of the dashboard server to observe GPIOs, set payload, zero ft sensor etc

# Hardware Interface

TBD: There is already a [page](../../concepts/building-blocks/hardware-interfaces.md) on hardware interfaces. Are these
two conflicting? Should we link to this one?

Within the context of AICA Studio, but also in ROS, hardware interfaces are used as middleware between controllers and
actual hardware. In other words, they are tasked with two-way communication of commands and state feedback between the
robot and the controller that usually lies above.

## Local and Remote Control

The concept of Local and Remote Control on PolyScope can be easiest explained by introducing a _primary_ and _secondary_
device architecture. In Local Control, the controller is the _primary_ and has full authority on loading and starting
programs. In other words, the robot has to be used in person through the teach pendant and any commands sent from an
external source will be rejected. On the other hand, Remote Control allows to control the robot via external sources,

> such as sockets, I/Os and the Dashboard Server. In this case, the controller is the _secondary_ and external sources can

Reviewer: It's written like this when you activate the remote control mode on the teach pendant.

load and start programs or directly send URScript commands to the controller.

:::note

Safety features remain active in Remote Control.

:::

Choosing one of the two modes depends on the specific situation at hand. During a development phase, it might be
preferable to create the programs in Local Mode, whereas in a production setting, PLCs would be responsible to load and
start the desired programs while the robot is in Remote Control. With the AICA System, users have the possiblity to get
the best of both modes:

1. Take full control of the robot from an AICA application (requires Remote Control)

> 2. Run an AICA application as one node of a program (works in both Local and Remote Control)

Reviewer: A PLC could start a program that has external control program nodes inside (I think)

---
sidebar_position: 9
title: UR Hardware Interface
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

import urHWIExternalControl from './assets/ur-hwi-external-control.png'
import urHWISequenceGraph from './assets/ur-hwi-sequence-graph.png'
import urHWISequenceRunning from './assets/ur-hwi-sequence-running.gif'
import urHWIHandGuidingGraph from './assets/ur-hwi-hand-guiding-graph.png'
import urHWIHandGuidingParams from './assets/ur-hwi-hand-guiding-params.png'

# Universal Robots

Universal Robots (UR) offers a variety of collaborative robotic arms widely adopted across industries and research for

> their ease of use, simplicity and flexibility. UR robots are easy to use and integrate thanks to a graphical interface

Reviewer: Repetition of ease of use

on their teach pendant and support for tailor-made, customized scripting via URScript.

The ecosystem around UR robots is highly developer-friendly, with open-source drivers, documentation, and integration

> support for frameworks such as ROS (Robot Operating System). Their modular architecture and standardized communication

Reviewer: Wouldnt really call that modular.

7. The service call should be formatted as a dictionary of the required values, the mass and the center of gravity. For
   example, it could look like the following:

```yaml
{ 
  mass: 1.2, 
  cog: [0.15, 0.1, 0.05] 
}
```

8. Add another delay of 2 seconds, and finally another event, connected to the **Hand back control** service of the
   Dashboard Controller.

9. The sequence should start when the pendant hands over control. To achieve that, connect the **Programm running**
   predicate of the controller to the sequence block, setting the event to **Start**. The application graph should look
   like the following:

<div class="text--center">
  <img src={urHWISequenceGraph} alt="Sequence application graph" />
</div>

Click on **Play** to run the AICA application. Repeat the same at the teaching pendant's screen to run the program. The
robot moves through the positions and stops to hand over control to AICA Studio. The payload is adjusted, and control is
handed back to the pendant.

<div class="text--center">
  <img src={urHWISequenceRunning} alt="Exchange of control" />
</div>

## Hand Guiding controller

> NOTE: Did not really know what to write in the next paragraph, the reason we did not just implement simple freedrive.

Reviewer: The reason we implemented the hand guiding controller is that the freedrive feels a bit janky sometimes, whereas the admittance control is much smoother and yields nicer trajectories/recordings

Author: I wouldn't want to phrase it like that, seems like we are trash-talking UR.

Author: I rephrased a bit.

---
sidebar_position: 9
title: Universal Robots
---

import urHwiStudio from './assets/ur-hwi-studio.png'
import urHwiSwitchMode from './assets/ur-hwi-switch-mode.gif'
import urHwiHeadlessMode from './assets/ur-hwi-headless-mode.png'
import urHwiRemoteExample from './assets/ur-hwi-remote-example.gif'
import urHWIExternalControl from './assets/ur-hwi-external-control.png'
import urHWISequenceGraph from './assets/ur-hwi-sequence-graph.png'
import urHWISequenceRunning from './assets/ur-hwi-sequence-running.gif'
import urHWIHandGuidingGraph from './assets/ur-hwi-hand-guiding-graph.png'
import urHWIHandGuidingParams from './assets/ur-hwi-hand-guiding-params.png'
import urHWINetworkingSettings from './assets/ur-hwi-networking-settings.png'
import urHWIURProgram from './assets/ur-hwi-ur-program.png'
import urHWIImpedanceController from './assets/ur-hwi-impedance-controller.png'

# Universal Robots

Universal Robots (UR) offers a range of collaborative robotic arms in different sizes and with different payloads that
are widely adopted across industries and research for their accessibility and flexibility. A graphical interface on the

> teach pendant allows to easily and intuitively program and integrate UR robots. At the same time, skilled users can get

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
teach pendant allows to easily and intuitively program and integrate UR robots. At the same time, advanced users can get
```

access to the full capabilities of the manipulators through scripting in URScript language or even by developing
software add-ons, so-called URCaps.

The ecosystem around UR robots is highly developer-friendly, with open-source communication libraries, drivers,
documentation, and integration support for frameworks such as ROS. Additionally, their simulation tool URSim allows

> developers to test and validate robot programs and interfaces without needing access to the physical hardware and makes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
developers to test and validate robot programs and interfaces without needing access to physical hardware and makes
```

actual hardware. In other words, they are tasked with two-way communication of commands and state feedback between the
robot and the controller that usually lies above. -->

## Local and Remote Control

The concept of Local and Remote Control on PolyScope can be easiest explained by introducing a _primary_ and _secondary_
device architecture. In Local Control, the controller is the _primary_ and has full authority on loading and starting
programs. In other words, the robot has to be used in person through the teach pendant and any commands sent from an
external source will be rejected. On the other hand, Remote Control allows to control the robot via external sources,
such as sockets, I/Os and the Dashboard Server. In this case, the controller is the _secondary_ and external sources can
load and start programs or directly send URScript commands to the controller.

:::note

Safety features remain active in Remote Control.

:::

Choosing one of the two modes depends on the specific task at hand. During a development phase, it might be preferable
to create the programs in Local Mode, whereas in a production setting, PLCs would be responsible to load and start the

> desired programs while the robot is in Remote Control. With the AICA System, users have the possibility to get the best

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
desired programs while the robot is in Remote Control. With the AICA System, users have the chance to get the best
```

nit: not the best alternative with my suggestion, but "possibility" somewhat reads weird to me

of both modes:

1. Take full control of the robot from an AICA application (requires Remote Control)
2. Run an AICA application as one node of a program (works in both Local and Remote Control)

### Full control of the robot from an AICA application

For this first, simpler case, no additional installation steps are required. Apart from setting the correct robot IP,
two requirements have to be met:

- On the robot, Remote Control has to be activated. For that, first activate Remote Control in the system settings as
  explained [here](./ur-sim-guide.md#accessing-and-configuring-the-simulated-robot), then switch from _Local_ to
  _Remote_ mode on the top right corner of the teach pendant. The interface automatically switches to the _Run_ tab and

>   disables other tabs, indicating that control has been handed over to external sources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  disables other tabs, indicating that control is ready to be handed over to external sources.
```

nit: again, not the best replacement, but I feel like the handover is complete closer to when we have "Running" (i.e., it can me in remote but no one is connected to it)

Reviewer 2: hmm, yes fair enough

    edges:
      sequence_sequence_event_trigger_2_hardware_hardware_joint_trajectory_controller_set_trajectory:
        path:
          - x: 420
            y: 1060
          - x: 620
            y: 1060
          - x: 620
            y: 900
      sequence_sequence_event_trigger_1_hardware_hardware_joint_trajectory_controller_set_trajectory:
        path:
          - x: 240
            y: 860
      hardware_hardware_joint_trajectory_controller_has_trajectory_succeeded_on_stop_on_stop:
        path:
          - x: 540
            y: 780
          - x: 540
            y: 480
          - x: -20
            y: 480
          - x: -20
            y: 140

  ```
</details>

### Run an AICA application as one node of a program

This second case requires the [External Control URCap](https://github.com/UniversalRobots/Universal_Robots_ROS2_Driver/tree/jazzy/ur_robot_driver/resources) to be installed. This is the easiest way to get started and test the
integration with AICA functionality, as it allows users to keep their workflows intact, and only hand over control to an
AICA application in a controlled manner and whenever that is required. After the application completes its task,

> control may be hand over back to the main node. To do that, follow the next steps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
control may be handed over back to the main node. To do that, follow the next steps:
```

1. The external control URCap needs to be configured to the right remote control address. Navigate to the **Installation** tab
and set the address to the one of the device that will be running the AICA application.

<div class="text--center">
  <img src={urHWINetworkingSettings} alt="External control URCap networking settings" />
</div>

2. The robot should remain in local mode, and the external control node placed within the program in the desired location.

<div class="text--center">
  <img src={urHWIURProgram} alt="UR Program with external control URCap" style={{ width: '40%' }} />
</div>

> 3. Headless mode in the hardware interface should be set to false, and no controller should be activated when the program starts. 

Reviewer 2: feel like here we should emphasize by making this bold, although it is quite clearly a separate step

from future Vaios: this is actually done in the next section step 3

effector.

:::

After pressing **Play**, the manipulator can be hand guided to points in space, driven by the forces applied on its end
effector. In other words, it reads forces in the FT sensor, and "admits" them, trying to set the measured force to zero.
The controller can be further tuned and adjusted by using its parameters:

- Velocity/Force limits: the velocities and forces that can be applied by the controller in force mode (X, Y, Z, RZ, RY,
  RZ).
- Force/Torque threshold: the thresholds above which the hand guiding behavior is activated.
- Compliant axes selection: the axes along which the robot can be hand guided (1-enabled, 0-disabled).
- Hold delay: forces below the thresholds above for this duration will disable hand guiding.
- X/Y/Z limits: spatial boundaries for the end effector motion, vectors of two values for the lower and upper limit.
- Reference orientation: quaternion representing a desired orientation in base frame
- Angular limit: allowed deviation from the reference orientation
- Linear/Angular boundary strength: gains to apply restitution forces/torques, in case linear or angular limits are

>   exceeded.

Reviewer 2: I'd put parameters in bold to make them a bit more distinct and readable but that's just me. Up to your personal style

<div class="text--center">
  <img src={urHWIHandGuidingParams} alt="Hand guiding controller parameters" style={{ width: '40%' }} />
</div>

## Impedance controller

> AICA's tailored impedance controller for UR robots takes advantage of UR's force mode to drive the robot in a compliant manner, 
> enabling safe, adaptive interaction with the environment.

Reviewer 2: Should we somewhat invert the phrasing?

```suggestion
AICA's UR impedance controller is tailored to take advantage of UR's force mode to drive the robot in a compliant manner, 
enabling safe, adaptive interaction with the environment.
```

> The controller takes a Cartesian state as input, and based on the error with respect to the current state, as well as the defined
> stiffness and damping parameters, tries to apply a wrench in space. In cases of free space, this will result in uninterrupted motion,
> while the robot will react compliantly to disturbances and forces applied on the end effector (where the force sensor lies).   

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The controller takes a desired Cartesian state as input. Then, it computes the error between input and current state. Using the defined
stiffness and damping parameters, it applies a desired wrench in space. In cases of obstacle-free space this will result in uninterrupted motion,
while the robot will react compliantly to disturbances and forces applied on the end effector (where the force sensor lies).   
```

I think this needs to be rephrased a bit (a bit too long in terms of sentences and can be a bit more precise). I added a suggestion just to highlight where I think we should rephrase, but up to you how this is done at the end

:::note

> For the controller to operate, the names of the sensor and the reference frame need to be defined as before. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the controller to operate, the names of the sensor and the reference frame need to be defined similarly to previous sections. 
```

perhaps this?

> For the controller to operate, the names of the sensor and the reference frame need to be defined similarly to previous sections. 

Reviewer 2: force limits too, no?

### Run an AICA application as one node of a program

This second case requires the [External Control URCap](https://github.com/UniversalRobots/Universal_Robots_ROS2_Driver/tree/jazzy/ur_robot_driver/resources) to be installed. This is the easiest way to get started and test the
integration with AICA functionality, as it allows users to keep their workflows intact, and only hand over control to an
AICA application in a controlled manner and whenever that is required. After the application completes its task,
control may be handed over back to the main node. To do that, follow the next steps:

1. The external control URCap needs to be configured to the right remote control address. Navigate to the **Installation** tab
and set the address to the one of the device that will be running the AICA application.

<div class="text--center">
  <img src={urHWINetworkingSettings} alt="External control URCap networking settings" />
</div>

2. The robot should remain in local mode, and the external control node placed within the program in the desired location.

<div class="text--center">
  <img src={urHWIURProgram} alt="UR Program with external control URCap" style={{ width: '40%' }} />
</div>

> 3. **Headless mode** in the hardware interface should be set to **false**, and no controller should be activated when the program starts. 

Author: I could not confirm this. 

I was able to activate an IK velocity controller with a point attractor, all active in the beginning, although not actively moving the robot. The hand over worked as usual, both the pendant and AICA could control the robot.

Did not test the GPIO bit.

> 3. **Headless mode** in the hardware interface should be set to **false**, and no controller should be activated when the program starts. 

Author: Both actually.

**(other than the dashboard controller, right?)**

4. The dashboard controller should be used to take and hand back control, check the next section.

> 5. The AICA application should be started first, the the robot program run. 

Author: ```suggestion
5. The AICA application should be started first, then the robot program run.
